## Materials and methods {.page_break_before}

### Use cases in the life sciences
We asked two available researchers in our department for a case where they looked for datasets in a scientific repository to answer a research questions.
For each use case, the name used throughout the paper, research question, and investigated repository are:  

- *Parkinsons_AE*: What are the differentially expressed genes between normal subjects and subjects with Parkinson's diseases in the brain frontal lobe?
  To answer this question, the researcher looked for a dataset in the search engine of ArrayExpress, a repository for microarray gene expression data based at the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), United Kingdom [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkg091];
- *NBIA_GEO*: What is the effect of the *WDR45* gene mutation in the brain?
  In this case, the researcher looked for a dataset in the search engine of Gene Expression Onmibus (GEO), a repository containing gene expression and other functional genomics data hosted at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), United States [@doi:10.1093/nar/30.1.207].

### What is *data* and what is *metadata*?
The FAIR principles use the terminology *data*, *metadata*, and  *(meta)data* (principles fully listed in Table <a href="#maturity_indicators">2</a>).
For our computational implementation, we needed precise definitions of these terms:  

- *data*: According to the Merrian-Webster online dictionary, *data* are "information in digital form that can be transmitted or processed" [@url:https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/data];

- *metadata*: In the Merrian-Webster online dictionary, *metadata* are defined as "data that provide information about other data" [@url:https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/metadata];

- *(meta)data*: We interpreted it as *data and/or metadata*. We used *(meta)data* as:
  - *data* for the principles R1, R1.1, and R1.2;
  - *metadata* for the principles I1 and I3;
  - *data and metadata* for the principles F1, F4, and A1.

In our implementation, these terms assumed the following meaning:

- *data*: It is the actual dataset that researchers analyzed to answer their research question. The analysis of the dataset itself is out of the scope of this study;

- *metadata*: For the following principles, the corresponding *metadata* are:

  - F2: Information that allow researchers to find the dataset s/he looks for. It coincides with the keywords used in the search;
  - F3: Identifier of the dataset in the repository;  
  - I3: Reference to other metadata;  
  - R1: Information about the dataset, other than the search keywords;
  - R1.1: Data license;
  - R1.2: Data provenance as publication title, author names, and one author's email address.


In all cases, we assumed that *data* and *metadata* were hosted in the same repository.


### Calculating FAIR maturity indicators  
Because the FAIR guidelines emphasize on the importance of *data* and *metadata* being "machine-interpretable",
we collected information about datasets and repositories via an application programming interface (API) wherever possible.
We queried three different sources:   

- Data repositories ([ArrayExpress](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/) and [Gene Expression Omnibus](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/)):
  We programmatically queried each repository using the same keywords researchers had used in their manual query when looking for a dataset.
  From the obtained metadata, we retrieved information to calculate maturity indicators for the principles F2, F3, I1, I3, R1, and R12;
- Registry of repository:
  We queried [re3data.org](www.re3data.org), a registry containing information about more than 2000 data repositories from various disciplines [cit].
  We used the retrieved  information to computed the maturity indicators for the principles F1, A2, and R12;   
- Searchable resource:
  We queried [Google Dataset Search](https://toolbox.google.com/datasetsearch), an emerging search engine specific for datasets, to quantify the principle F4.


The output of queries consisted of information structured in `xml`.
Details about the computation of each specific maturity indicator are in Table <a href="#maturity_indicators">2</a> and in our [Jupyter notebook-link]() (interactive on [binder-link]()).
To the majority of the maturity indicators, we assigned binary value 1 if the criterion was satisfied and 0 in the opposite case.
The only exception was the maturity indicator F2, calculated as the ratio between the number of keywords in the metadata over the total number of keywords used by the researcher in the manual query, and thus ranging from 0 to 1.
Similarly to what reported in the previous studies [@url:https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MaturityIndicators/Gen2],[@tag:tag_dunning],[@tag:tag_weber], we did not evaluate maturity indicators for the principles I2 and R1.3.

<!-- Table 2: Comparison of methods in the literature -->
<a name="maturity_indicators"></a>
<table style="width:100%;">
<caption><span>Table 2:</span>
FAIR principles and corresponding evaluation criteria proposed by
the Maturity Indicator Authoring Group [@url:https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MaturityIndicators/Gen2],
Dunning et al. [@tag:tag_dunning],
Weber et al. [@tag:tag_weber],
and our approach.
The criteria used in the first two works are extracted from their publication text, whereas the criteria by Weber et al. are from Table IV of their paper.
The metrics Weber et al. developed are
Q<sub>geo</sub> for image location,
Q<sub>time</sub>  for the time of picture acquisition,
Q<sub>ret</sub> when data is automatically downloadable only given its metadata, and
Q<sub>lic</sub> for found license.
In our approach, *dataset* metadata refers to metadata retrieved from ArrayExpress and Gene Expression Omnibus, whereas *registry* metadata consists of metadata retrieved from re3data.org.
In addition, we specify use of *(meta)data* as (data), (metadata), or (data and metadata), and  automatic (A) or manual (M) procedure to retrieve information.
Acronyms: GUID = Globally Unique IDentifier, DOI = Digital Object Identifier.
</caption>

<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" /> <!-- Principle-->
<col style="width: 19%" /> <!-- Wilkinson -->
<col style="width: 19%" /> <!-- Dunning -->
<col style="width: 19%" /> <!-- Weber-->
<col style="width: 19%" /> <!-- Our approach-->
</colgroup>

<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>
FAIR principles [@tag:tag_wilkinson_fair]
</th>
<th>
Guidelines by the Maturity Indicator Authoring Group [@url:https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MaturityIndicators/Gen2]
</th>
<th>
Dunning et al. [@tag:tag_dunning]
</th>
<th>
Weber et al. [@tag:tag_weber]
</th>
<th>
Our approach
</th>
</tr>
</thead>

<tbody>

<!-- F1 -->
<tr class="odd">
<td>
F1: (meta)data are assigned a globally unique and persistent identifier
</td>
<td>
The GUID matches a scheme that is globally unique and persistent in FAIRsharing
</td>
<td>
Persistent identifier is DOI or similar
</td>
<td>
Pass (embedded in DataCite)
</td>
<td>
"doi" icon is enabled in www.re3data.org (data and metadata) (M)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- F2 -->
<tr class="even">
<td>
F2: data are described with rich metadata (defined by R1 below)
</td>
<td>
Metadata contains “structured” elements (micrograph, JSON) or linked data (JSON-LD, RDFa)
</td>
<td>
Title, creator, date, contributors, keywords, temporal and spatial coverage
</td>
<td>
Q <sub>geo</sub>, Q <sub>chrono</sub>
</td>
<td>
Search keywords are in *dataset* metadata (A)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- F3 -->
<tr class="odd">
<td>
F3: metadata clearly and explicitly include the identifier of the data it describes
</td>
<td>
Metadata contains both its own GUID and the data GUID
</td>
<td>
DOI of data is in metadata
</td>
<td>
Pass (embedded in DataCite)
</td>
<td>
*Dataset* metadata contains dataset ID (A)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- F4 -->
<tr class="even">
<td>
F4: (meta)data are registered or indexed in a searchable resource
</td>
<td>
The digital resource can be found using web-based search engines
</td>
<td>
Dataset title found in google.com or duckduckgo.com
</td>
<td>
Pass
</td>
<td>
Dataset title found in Google Dataset Search (data and metadata) (M)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- A1 -->
<tr class="odd">
<td>
A.1 (meta)data are retrievable by their identifier using a standardized communications protocol
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
HTTP request returns 200
</td>
<td>
Q <sub>ret</sub>
</td>
<td>
HTTP request returns 200 (data and metadata) (A)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- A1.1 -->
<tr class="even">
<td>
A1.1 the protocol is open, free, and universally implementable
</td>
<td>
The resolution protocol is universally implementable with an open protocol
</td>
<td>
Accomplished if protocol is HTTP
</td>
<td>
Q <sub>ret</sub>
</td>
<td>
Accomplished if protocol is HTTP (A)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- A1.2 -->
<tr class="odd">
<td>
A1.2 the protocol allows for an authentication and authorization procedure, where necessary
</td>
<td>
The resolution protocol supports authentication and authorization for access to restricted content
</td>
<td>
Accomplished if protocol is HTTP
</td>
<td>
Q <sub>ret</sub>
</td>
<td>
Accomplished if protocol is HTTP  (A)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- A2 -->
<tr class="even">
<td>
A2. metadata are accessible, even when the data are no longer available
</td>
<td>
There is a policy for metadata
</td>
<td>
Repository has a clear policy statement
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
"data availability policy" is filled in *registry* metadata (A)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- I1 -->
<tr class="odd">
<td>
I1. (meta)data use a formal, accessible, shared, and broadly applicable language for knowledge representation
</td>
<td>
If hash-style metadata (e.g. JSON) or Linked Data are found, pass
</td>
<td>
Metadata is structured (e.g. Dublin Core)
</td>
<td>
Pass (embedded in DataCite)
</td>
<td>
*Dataset* metadata is structured (e.g. xml) (metadata) (M)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- I2 -->
<tr class="even">
<td>
I2. (meta)data use vocabularies that follow FAIR principles
</td>
<td>
(meta)data uses vocabularies that are, themselves, FAIR
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
</tr>

<!-- I3 -->
<tr class="odd">
<td>
I3. (meta)data include qualified references to other (meta)data
</td>
<td>
Metadata contain links that are not from the same source (domain/host)
</td>
<td>
Links to publications and terms definitions
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
*Dataset* metadata includes reference to other dataset IDs (metadata) (M)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- R1 -->
<tr class="even">
<td>
R1. meta(data) are richly described with a plurality of accurate and relevant attributes
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
Metadata provide information on how to reuse a dataset
</td>
<td>
Q <sub>geo</sub>, Q <sub>chrono</sub>
</td>
<td>
*Dataset* metadata contain more information than search keywords (F2) (data) (A)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- R1.1 -->
<tr class="odd">
<td>
R1.1. (meta)data are released with a clear and accessible data usage license
</td>
<td>
Metadata contains a pointer to the data license
</td>
<td>
Metadata license is present
</td>
<td>
Q <sub>lic</sub>
</td>
<td>
"datalicensename" and "datalicenseurl" are filled in *registry* metadata (data) (A)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- R1.2 -->
<tr class="even">
<td>
R1.2. (meta)data are associated with detailed provenance
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
Documentation on how data was created
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
"authors", "email" and "title" are filled in *dataset* metadata (data) (A)
</td>
</tr>

<!-- R1.3 -->
<tr class="odd">
<td>
R1.3. (meta)data meet domain-relevant community standards
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
<td>
N/A
</td>
</tr>

</tbody>
</table>


### Visualizing FAIR maturity indicators
To summarize and compare the outputs of our calculations, we created a FAIR balloon plots using the R package ggplot2 [@doi:10.1007/978-0-387-98141-3].
In the graph, each row corresponds to a use case and each column to a FAIR maturity indicator.
The size of each shape is the value of a specific FAIR maturity indicator for a particular dataset.
Diamonds represent maturity indicators determined manually, circles depict maturity indicators established automatically, and crosses illustrate   the maturity indicators we did not compute.
Finally, colors represent the group of principles in the acronym: blue for findable, red for accessible, green for interoperable, and orange for reusable.
